 
 
IS 269: 2015 Ordinary Portland Cement ― Specification  
(Sixth Revision) 
Cement is one of the most important building materials used in construction industry.  
It acts as a binding material to bind together different constituents of mortar and 
concrete.  Ordinary Portland Cement is manufactured by intimately mixing together 
calcareous and argillaceous and/or other silica, alumina or iron oxide bearing 
materials, burning them at a clinkering temperature of around 1450 °C and grinding 
the resultant clinker with gypsum.  The various constituents of cement include lime, 
silica, alumina, iron oxide and magnesia.  
Considering the prime importance of cement as the building material, Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) had formulated standards on 16 different types of cement based on 
their composition and specific applications.  This standard pertains to ordinary 
Portland cement (OPC) and covers the requirements such as its manufacture, physical 
and chemical requirements, packing, storage and marking.  The standard provides 
specifications for three grades of cement namely OPC 33, OPC 43 and OPC 53 based 
on their compressive strength.  This standard also prescribes requirements for sleeper 
grade cement (OPC 43S and OPC 53S) for use in manufacture of concrete sleepers 
for railways.  
For ensuring required performance of cement, the standard prescribes physical 
requirements such as fineness, setting time, soundness and compressive strength, 
apart from chemical requirements such as insoluble residue, loss on ignition, and 
maximum limits of chlorides, sulphur content and magnesia.  
The standard provides list of different types of performance improvers such as fly ash, 
granulated slag, silica fumes, limestone, metakaolin and rice husk ash along with 
their limits of addition which may be added at the time of grinding of cement clinker in 
order to modify one or more properties of cement.   
OPC finds application in nearly all types of construction such as buildings, foundations, 
bridges, dams, industrial structures, retaining walls, concrete pavements, flooring, 
roofing, masonry, plastering, cement based products, and many more. 
 
